As usual, we all, just kind of recognizing our place, we have the great good fortune to be
able to be here individually and together, both in this room and then through modern technology
throughout the world. That's special and precious, and we've inherited the full body of the
Buddhist
teachings, and that's basically broken down into, you know, the Theravada, Mahayana, Vajrayana,
all practiced as a great unity. And right from the beginning, we want to touch the heart
of the practice, and that's why all the great masters always remind us, before we begin
any activity, especially study, contemplation practice, connecting with the heart of these
three vehicles, which is what? Our joy, our devotion, really just recognizing out of all
the situations that are possible, we're free of so many circumstances and habitual patterns
that would prevent us to be reflecting on our own beautiful nature and trying to bring
those qualities up in our own minds and hearts for the benefit of all. Just really appreciating
that and then of course, and then really connecting with a mind and heart, just vast bodhicitta,
which is the essence of Mahayana, both generating it and actualizing it, really truly aspiring
that in this precious moment, it can really bring benefit to limitless beings beyond any
of our current limitations and capacities. And then the heart of the Vajrayana is our
pure perception, our devotion, our trust, and the innate goodness of everything. And
in a way, the perfection of this moment when we really take responsibility for every aspect
of our experience to the best of our ability taken to our mind, just how everything, all
forms, all appearances, are perfect and pure, all thoughts and movement are perfect and
pure, all awareness, our mind and its openness is perfect and pure. And that within the relative
truth is totally infused with the absolute truth, they're completely inseparable. And
therefore, this moment is very, might seem common, but we want to see the uncommon, beautiful
preciousness of this moment. It really is, this is recognizing this perfectly pure now
is the perfect moment to wake up and purify, to do good deeds, to receive blessings, to
remove our own veils and obscurations and their causes. So we'll just take a few moments just
to be with that.
Okay, so then, we'll just take a few moments, a few minutes to reflect a little bit. Again,
I mentioned before, I think there are several new people here, and some of us have been
practicing a long time, sometime maybe just beginning, and then a lot of us in between.
So just kind of going over some of the basics of what we're doing with nundro, and then
I think I especially just want to encourage, you know, practicing. So, we all know in that
light, nundro teachings and practice embodies all of the Buddhist teachings, we've heard
that, we know that. So, really reflecting on kind of what that means in a nutshell I think
is helpful, right, because often the nundro teachings embody all the Buddhist practices,
all the Buddhist teachings, very simply kind of the core essence of how we progress. So
how do we take that into our daily lives? You know, sometimes the nundro we've all heard
is translated as preliminary, and I think often, again, the great masters really kind
of really want us to make sure we understand clearly that by preliminary, doesn't mean
it's like a task we have to check off our list, or a form we have to fill out to get
by customs, or something like that, that it's somehow baby stuff, but more so, nundro is
preliminary and that it's essential. All these aspects we have in the nundro practices are
essential to our practice, and like Kim Poseong-Wampushe says, the nundro practice is from now
until
enlightenment, and that's why these skillful means of these really simple practices can
bring us to that, all the way to enlightenment, just keep going. And so, first, we have our
formal practice, and the formal practice of nundro, again, I'm just going to go over the
basics of the structure, right, we have within our practice, we have what are known as the
three frames, or three noble ones, a good way to have our formal practice be kind of effective
and have a nice container, that means it has a beginning, middle, and we're starting like
I just mentioned a few moments ago, with a mind and heart of joy, devotion, courage,
commitment, bodhicitta, devotion, just really reveling in the preciousness of the moment
and sparking with that, with love and devotion for all the lineage, feeling the presence
of the three jewels, the three roots, and our trust in the three jewels, doing our lineage
prayers, kind of setting that basis of the heart of the practice, and then with nundro
in particular, that kind of blends in with the four thoughts that turn the mind toward
the Dharma, with refuge, which is essentially affirming our deep trust and joy in the Buddha,
in the Buddha's teachings, and all those who uphold them, and in our own, in the innate
goodness and beautiful potential of our own mind, and our own experience to be totally
free, and that all beings can have that, so generating that really thought of enlightenment
for all beings, which is bodhicitta, and then we're generating merit through the third part,
which is making the mandala offerings to the three jewels, on top of accumulating our merit,
increasing our joy, appreciation, our bodhicitta, we're also purifying our obscurations and
mistakes, purifying the ultimate mistake we have, which is not recognizing our nature,
getting caught up and tangled up in our conceptions and our hopes and our fears, dragging them
around in all kinds of drama and boringness, etc., etc., but purifying that, so purifying
the ultimate mistake we have, which is just simply not recognizing our nature, through
the skillful means of the Vajrasattva practice, and then also purifying all the relative abstains
and mistakes and obscurations we have, again, all the way from our most common, rough, emotional,
and karmic obscurations that we're creating, kind of passing them, purifying them through
to our more subtle knowledge obscurations and very subtle habitual patterns are being purified
all the way to enlightenment, and then the supreme guru yoga is the real heart of the
practice of mingling our own mind with the mind of the fully enlightened state embodied
as guru Padmasambhava, inseparable from all appearances of our own mind, liberating our
own mind, okay, and once we spend our time with that, which we're going to do after I
finish talking, we always dedicate the merit, again, all the positive results of our practice,
getting that for all the limitless beings throughout all time, all space, all possibilities, that
the positive effects of our study, our practice, our meditation, our actions can really just
dedicate it to be a boundless source of refuge and support for all beings, no matter where,
and like the Buddha reminds us to, we can also dedicate that, all of our past deeds,
our present deeds, our future deeds, those of other, everyone, from the most simple act
of refraining from harm to the most supreme enlightenment, just totally rejoicing and dedicating
that, and making time for the formal practice is so important. So, you know, when we talk about how
to bring practice into daily life, it might sound kind of snarky, but really being mindful of how
much time we're going to really set aside for some formal practice is important, because we can
have,
of course, we're blessed by receiving so many teachings, and we can contemplate them to some
degree, but really absorbing them into our heart and just letting, letting the practice take its
effect, you know, on a deeper level than just our intellect is so beautiful and so important, and
maybe as we do that, the more we recognize how beautiful and good that is. So again, as far as
bringing dharma into daily life, we want to always actually make a little time for formal practice
that's reasonable and practical, you know, in relation to the other things we're also committing
to do, but if we really want to practice, if that's part of our idea, making sure we're actually
making a little time for ourselves to practice is good, and within that apply these three frames
and
doing whatever our practice is, in this case our nundra practice. So forgive me, I'm being a little
bit very general here, but just kind of going over these, these basics. So generally, our Buddhist
practice too, you know, when we think about nundra, I kind of just was very briefly going over the
formal practice we have, which is called, right, there's two kinds of practice we have, meditation,
post-meditation. So of course, our daily life for most of us is more than just sitting on the
cushion
and having a formal practice session. But just like the nundra practice isn't just a preliminary
thing that we get by and check off and leave behind us as we move on to something else, I think for
myself and all of us just kind of trying to really maintain whatever we come upon in our formal
practice, it's touching that home base. So really trying to bring the atmosphere of what we find
when
we're studying, when we're contemplating, especially when we practice and dedicate the merit,
bringing
that out into the other aspects of our life outside of that very special precious time and place
for
our formal practice we reserve in the day, but like not leaving the atmosphere of our nundra
practice
behind with that. So again, that's kind of saying the obvious, but I think it's kind of important
because I, for one, sometimes just really forget the obvious. And then of course, just as we're in
the day, we can from time to time, reflect back to our mind. Rinpoche always says he's three thing,
three assistants that help us throughout anything, whether it's our formal practice or our informal
practice through our meditation or post meditation. That's just keeping mindful, keeping gently
relaxed
manner, mindful of our intentions, our view, seeing how much our conduct is following through with
our
our true intentions and what we currently understand, you know, the teachings to be. And so we can
always, of course, in the day, reflect on within nundra, reflect on the thoughts from time to time,
reflect first, just take a moment, relax, step back, look to our own mind. We can just in life,
see everything we can find in the in the four thoughts that turn the mind, living examples, kind
of recognize the pressure, our freedoms and our endowments and kind of see where how much we're
engaging with them and appreciating them. How much we're either seeing impermanence, expecting
things to be fixed and everlasting, and always the way they they seem now forever. Or how much we
're
recognizing how everything's always moving. And how much we're keeping in mind, you know, the
inevitability of karma of its, you know, how our attitude, how our view, our intention, our
motivation,
you know, our story and how and then what we're doing with it is going to have its results. And
they're going to always reflect the tone and the the attitude through which we say things and do
things. And then just some sorrow, just really living example, looking especially inside ourselves,
but other examples of what we can see in the world of just discontentment, misunderstanding,
everyone wanting happiness. And on some level, not having it on all kinds of degrees, ourselves
included. Just kind of having that living example as Dharma practitioners, that if we don't
understand,
don't aren't recognizing our nature, and until we fully recognize it, we're always going to have
some
degree of uncomfortableness and dissatisfaction. And that's not like a punishment. That's, you know
,
that's just how it is until we we see more clearly. And then again, with refuge, as we're in our
days,
reflecting on the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, the different levels of just what that means to
us,
what that's what's that's what's been said to us, how we understand that, and how much how much are
we really trusting in that and enjoying that and rejoicing in that and encouraging ourselves. And
then of course, just connecting with our bodhicitta, our motivation, reflecting on these four
thought,
you know, four boundless thoughts, four boundless motivations, that all beings without exception
can
be free of suffering and its causes, and happy, happy and have all that causes of happiness, know
their true nature, which is totally without this harmony, and have all the fill fulfillments in the
common level, too. And that all beings can have more and more of a boundless heart and not be
discriminating between who deserves happiness and who doesn't really having that open heart. And
then
of course, actualizing how much we can just tune in with our own mind and view and make everything
we
do one of the Paramita practices, how much we can bring in an open attitude, bring in our, our
wisdom
to really infuse a heart, a generous heart, share what we can try to and as far as morality, seeing
,
trying to see how much we're really align, lining ourselves up with what at, what at least we've
heard or know, is a beneficial way to interact with the situations we're meeting, the people we're
meeting, trying to be more patient, which means here, taking things as they are and allowing the
process and keeping a joyful attitude, really trying to connect with our joyful effort and our
our beautiful motivation that brought us to the Dharma, probably in the first place, keeping that
fresh, and not getting distracted, really maintaining our concentration with what we're doing, not
losing
inside of what we're doing, you know, both on the Dharma level, but even on the common worldly
level.
And then again, bringing our wisdom with everything, knowing things as they are both
relatively, absolutely. It's beautiful. And then as far as mandala practice, you know, like we say
formally, right, bodies, enjoyments, possessions, glories, the succession of all my lifetimes I
offer to the Buddha Dharma Sangha in order to accumulate all the merit and wisdom. So just we
can kind of bring that attitude with us to with, you know, we're doing it on the cushion, but then
when we stand up from the cushion, keeping that attitude with us to with our present body, our
present luxuries, our present actions, kind of in keeping that pure view, however we can. And then
of course, purifying our our mistakes through the Vajrasattva practice, but also just being open to
recognize we don't always have the full picture, we all make mistakes. And having, you know,
recognizing it, doing what we can to purify it, and not repeat it. It's great. And then just
keeping in our minds and heart, again, our awareness and the presence and blessings of the
three jewels, the three roots embodied as Guru Padmasambhava. Just trying to keep that kind of
that view with us, and that awareness from time to time, how that can relate to our Guru Yoga,
and then dedicate the merit. So I should start talking soon. But I'll just start to say, as far
as both off the cushion, on the cushion, keeping the practice to the best of our ability. And like
Rinpoche says, if we fall in the ditch, get up. And I think it's especially important that we
encourage ourselves, because we can have the practice and we can be really inspired. And we
can be doing the practice. And then in doing the practice, we can begin to see more of maybe our
obstacles, more of the things that are our basic assumptions and attitudes that aren't benefiting
ourselves or others, undermining in all kinds of ways. And there can be all kinds of outer
circumstances happening too. That can be really shocking and disturbing, but really trying to do
the best we can to encourage ourselves to keep with the heart of the practice, at least in our
attitude, and trying to keep some formal practice that really helps. Again, it's usually conception
to move beyond conception, to be more and more natural with our true nature. And so in that way
too, when we're doing our formal practice, we shouldn't always be expecting it to have the
same flavor every single time. And we shouldn't be undermining ourselves if we're having a more
challenging time on whatever level. So keep, please, I'm talking to Laya too, but all of us,
I think we're all encouraged by our teachers to keep our practice and not have our practice have
to be conditional, but trust in the effectiveness of the method. And keep going, do the practice.
And if you don't have time practically, maybe as much time as you did at some other time in
your life, know what you can do right now to have like a nice container to do your practice and do
it. I think, again, I haven't, and I don't think anybody's ever regretted doing practice. I know
I've certainly regretted not doing practice, but doing the practice, not expecting to feel a
certain
way to have to be happy, to have to be joyful, or to have to be miserable, to have no expectations,
but to meet the practice as best we can as we are and do the practice. Let it really, again,
mingle with our heart. Because I think, again, for all of us, as we do the practice, it makes a
difference. So let's do the practice now. So again, just a little bit of touching home a little bit
and trying to inspire in myself and all of us, especially this is while there's so much beauty
blazing in the world, there also is obviously a lot of of tumult, and that's always the fact.
Sometimes it comes closer to home, but that's when we need, like, our joy, our devotion, and
especially, like, Rinpoche say, our courage, our commitment. Please. Okay, so if we know we need to
do the practice, and we've heard we need to do the practice, and we really, and we know, I just
need
to do this, you know? I know. So, but we still are stuck. So what are, like, some practical tips
for
daily life? I know I should do this, but I didn't. Tomorrow I know I should do it, and I didn't. So
it can become, like, big rut, you know? Yep. So what are, like, things you found just really
practical
ways to, like, kind of just jump start? Do it. Which means, think about it. Think about, okay,
when, how much time do I have, practically speaking? How much practical time do I have to
practice? With whatever our other obligations are, knowing our own kind of energy, you know? What
can
I do? What's the, in a way, we could think, what's the minimum amount of time I know I could always
do a little bit of formal practice? So I can start it, do it, and finish it. Because for myself,
that's really helpful, and really feeling empowered to make that, and really remember the whole
point
of our practice. It's to benefit everything. Our whole day, this life, all lives, all beings, and
it,
like we're told in the teachings, it starts now. So kind of keeping that in our mind, in our heart,
and again, our motivation, and really think and really reserve that special time we have, just like
we would for anything we hold precious, but really thinking about why is Dharma practice precious
to
us, you know? So making that time and having it be something doable, you know, is really helpful
for
me. Because then if I am feeling a little bit uninspired, I also, or it's like gonna be a really
busy day, you know, then I know, oh wait, I have an hour, say, to practice, and then when I just
get
myself in that, then no matter what, I know in an hour I might as well relax and enjoy this, and
then
finish it, dedicate the merit, and there it goes. And I think like most two of our habits, they
take
a while to take effect. So I think definitely when we start a new thing, or have to restart a new
thing, having that patience to kind of let it take effect and let ourselves experience what
actually
happens when we do it, instead of holding back from doing it for some reason. So that's what I
mean by just do it. Just really do the practice and don't have to feel a certain way, just do it,
and have it have a clear beginning, a clear middle, a clear end. And if you have time, you know,
constraints, then make sure it gives seeing how it fits in your schedule. And then too, I know I
find
for myself, morning's good, that's maybe not the best for everyone, but so making the time, and if
you need to do something, just get up and move around, have some hot water or some tea or coffee,
take a shower, and then go sit down. I don't know. I think that's really simple, because then
everything else can start to take place. We've all heard some degree of instructions, and we've had
some degree of practice, but I think just making that special time and place to do it, and just
doing it, you know, that's kind of, is that too snarky or too simple an answer, I think, because
they really just
do it. Let go. And, you know, so, so let's just do it. Unless does anyone else have something else
to
say or question? Because now, yeah. Yes, what's that?
Right. Yeah. Everyone has their own ways. That's good. I think in general, it's good to try to do
something where you can really complete. And then if there's time to do more, do too. Again,
everybody
has different circumstances. But being able to complete the practice, I think, making sure that's
something we can always do. So that's why maybe if your session can't be entirely as long as you
wish
it could be, you've done it. And then if there's time to do more, whether it's right then or later
in the day, that's fabulous. There's no reason not to. But then there's that beautiful inspiration
of
like being able to start something, do it, finish it. Especially if maybe at the beginning of it,
we
were having resistance. Right. And that can be done fast too. Yeah. So say you're like, Oh, the
doorbell rings ring ring, whatever. And you're in the middle of your practice, you forgot, then you
could just one second dissolve. Then then we all have the easy to easy thing we've memorized by
this
merit may all obtain omniscience have four lines where it's just like the go to full on, give it
away, make the offering complete and seal. And then at least I mean, that takes a solid 10
seconds, then it seals. It's just as a quick that's like an emergency stop stop of leading. But
quick,
but then in general, just like Lama lai saying, try to like really kind of round it out, like fully
.
But if we have to seal quick, then that's, yeah, it's doable. We can do this practice session could
be a minute long and have a beginning, middle and end. But then we should try to grow that. Yeah.
And the, the dojum terso nundro, as we all know, it's so concise. And we want to be relaxing,
connecting with the meaning. But as we do that, if we really had to, you can do this whole practice
in like five minutes, five minutes, but you know, what we can and really being able to savor it and
connect. I mean, that's great. And that's why we do accumulations. And that's why we, we do the
practice, but, but practice, I think it's quality, right, not quantity, whether it's the amount of
time or the frequency. So now we've been talking, talking, talking, talking. So let's do a little
practice. We'll just sit for a moment. And then we'll do a seven line prayer and go right to the
practice. Thank you.